and the United Nations has called for a
full investigation into the death of an
American Turkish dual citizen in the
occupied West Bank on Friday the
spokesman for the UN Secretary General
reiterated that civilians must be
protected at all times eyewitnesses and
Palestinian officials say Israeli
soldiers shot 26-year-old isor ESG ADI
in the head as she took part in a weekly
protest against the expansion of Jewish
settlements in the town of beta near
the je National was rushed to a hospital
but later pronounced dead well let's
speak to our diplomatic correspondent
James landale hello there to you James
uh just tell us a bit more about this
incident well as you say it was a weekly
protest uh near Naas against an illegal
settlement uh where there have been
these protests um you know for a long
time uh against the settlement uh that
has been made by uh some Israelis in an
area that even the Israeli government
says is an illegal Outpost uh so it's
quite a regular place for people to
demonstrate and
protest and anyway this young woman um
this young American woman um aona esgi
AI who's just literally just graduated
from Washington University in Seattle
had recently arrived in the West Bank
she was taking part in this uh
protest and uh during that protest uh it
reached a stage where the Israeli forces
fired it's what I would to say with two
shots and one of those shots uh hit uh
Mesi in the head and uh she was taken to
hospital H where she later died the IDF
say that they are reviewing this
incident uh they say that shots were
fired against what they called uh a man
who was
instigating uh Violence by throwing
rocks uh the organization which which
has run this protest denied that it was
violent in any way and said that uh Mesi
was 200 meters away from the police from
the soldiers when this happened so
either way you know there will be
different accounts of what happened uh
but clearly a young American woman with
Turkish Origins um has died uh as a
result of this incident okay and and
like you said she is a jeel national
what's Washington what comments have
Washington made on this
incident well the Americans so far have
said that they think it's a deeply
disturbing killing uh that's the the
message from the white house uh they've
also said that they've asked the
Israelis to um investigate the United
Nations have called for a full
investigation and the family uh have
asked they say that an Israeli
investigation would not be adequate to
use their language they say they have
asked uh President Biden to order a full
independent an investigation to try and
get to the bottom of precisely what what
happened because you know people die
very frequently in the West Bank as a
result of shootings between clashes
between both sides uh and sometimes
there are investigations sometimes there
are not and it is often very very hard
to get to the bottom of precisely what
happened and the problem here is that
any kind of so-called independent
investigation is going to have to rely
on the acquiescence of the Israeli
authorities and that's not always
forthcoming and there has been a
significant amount of increase uh
increase in violence in the West Bank uh
James just just talk us through the
latest
developments Well the West Bank is an
incredibly violent place and has been
ever since uh hamas's attack uh on
Israel in October 7th last year well
over 600 almost almost 700 Palestinians
now have died in the West Bank so not in
Gaza in the West Bank as a result of
violence much of it involving clashes
between Israeli settlers uh and
Palestinians clashes that are quite
often ignored beted by Israeli forces in
the West Bank uh and it is a source of
huge concern in Western capitals and
amongst diplomats that the West Bank
violence spirals out of control and
triggers uh another Uprising some
diplomats talk about maybe another front
in a war which began on the 7th of
October but has long spread outside of
gaza's borders and so that is the fear
here that is why Western capitals the
United Kingdom the United States and
others keep putting sanctions on Israeli
settlers who they believe are conducting
illegal operations and they are putting
pressure on the Israeli government to do
more to restrain these settlers who do
not have the full support in any way of
Israeli Society but whom the is at the
moment the Israeli government led by
Benjamin Netanyahu depends on their
support and that's why violence like
this continues in the West Bank James
landale thank you very much indeed